Card Editing System Redesign Proposal
Current Issues and Proposed Solution
Project

Bullet Card Roguelike (Godot 4)

Purpose

This document outlines the limitations of the current card editing implementation and proposes a redesigned editing workflow centered around a dedicated Component Preview and Card Editor.

The objective is to create a system that is:

Easier for players to understand
Easier to maintain
Easier to expand with future features
More visually satisfying through direct manipulation of component stickers
1. Current System

The game currently contains the following systems:

Hand (cards currently available to fire)
Loadout (12 permanent cards used for reloads)
Inventory (cards obtained during gameplay)
Component Inventory
Card Editor

Components are collected during gameplay and can be applied to cards to modify their behaviour.

The original implementation attempted to allow components to be dragged directly from the inventory onto cards.

2. Current Problems
2.1 Multiple Responsibilities for Cards

Inventory and Loadout cards currently serve several unrelated purposes simultaneously.

A card is expected to:

Display card information
Be selectable
Open the editor
Accept dropped components
Participate in swapping between inventory and loadout

As a result, each card has become both a display element and an editing tool.

This greatly complicates both the code and the player interaction.

2.2 Too Many Drag-and-Drop Targets

Under the original design, every card in the Inventory and Loadout potentially becomes a drop target.

Loadout

Card
Card
Card
Card
...

Inventory

Card
Card
Card
Card
...

Each card must implement:

Drop validation
Component application
UI refresh
Selection state

As the number of cards increases, so does the number of interactive UI elements.

2.3 Component Inventory Has Little Purpose

Currently the Component Inventory functions primarily as storage.

Players immediately drag components from it onto cards.

This provides little opportunity to inspect:

Component name
Description
Statistics
Rarity
Sticker artwork

The player is encouraged to use components without understanding them.

2.4 Editing Logic is Distributed

Editing behaviour is spread across multiple scripts.

Responsibilities are split between:

Main.gd
CardSlot.gd
ComponentSlot.gd
Player.gd

This creates unnecessary coupling and has already resulted in issues such as:

signal mismatches
setup() argument mismatches
inconsistent card rendering
drag-and-drop failures
2.5 Components Lack Visual Placement

Currently a card simply stores

components = [
    "explosive",
    "poison"
]

Although this records which upgrades are attached, it contains no information regarding where those upgrades appear visually on the card.

The intended "sticker" system therefore cannot be implemented.

3. Design Goals

The redesigned editor should satisfy the following objectives:

Cards remain simple objects whose primary purpose is storage and display.
Components should be inspectable before application.
Component placement should feel tactile and intentional.
Editing should occur in one dedicated workspace.
Future functionality should be easy to add.
4. Proposed Architecture

Instead of dragging directly from the Component Inventory onto cards, editing will occur in two stages.

The player selects a component.
The selected component opens inside a dedicated Component Preview.
The sticker shown in the preview is dragged onto the card currently displayed in the Card Editor.

The workflow becomes:

Component Inventory

Click Component

        │

        ▼

Component Preview

        │

Drag Sticker

        ▼

Card Editor

        │

Drop Sticker

        ▼

Sticker becomes part of card

This separates selection from editing, resulting in a cleaner interaction.

5. Revised Editor Layout

The editor becomes two coordinated panels.

+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|                       Inventory                               |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+

+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Component Preview        | Card Editor                        |
|                          |                                    |
| Explosive                |            Card                    |
| +30 Damage               |                                    |
| Explosion Radius +40     |       Drop Sticker Here            |
|                          |                                    |
|        Sticker           |                                    |
|     (drag this)          |                                    |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------+

The player now has clear visual separation between:

Selecting a component
Inspecting a component
Editing a card
6. User Workflow

The complete editing process becomes:

Click Card

↓

Card opens in editor

↓

Click Component

↓

Component preview updates

↓

Drag sticker from preview

↓

Drop sticker on card

↓

Sticker is applied

The interaction closely resembles placing decals or stickers onto a physical trading card.

7. Component Data Structure

Instead of storing only component identifiers,

components = [
    "explosive",
    "poison"
]

each applied component stores its visual placement.

components = [
    {
        "id": "explosive",
        "offset": Vector2(42, -16)
    },
    {
        "id": "poison",
        "offset": Vector2(-28, 18)
    }
]

Each component now records:

component identifier
sticker position

This allows accurate reconstruction of the card artwork.

8. Rendering

The Card Editor renders:

Card Background

Projectile Artwork

Existing Layer Icons

Applied Component Stickers

Each sticker reads its stored offset and is positioned accordingly.

Sticker.position = component.offset

No additional lookup logic is required.

9. Why Drag From the Component Preview?

Dragging directly from the inventory presents several usability issues.

Inventory entries are typically compact and optimized for browsing rather than interaction.

By introducing a dedicated Component Preview, the player gains access to detailed information before committing to an upgrade.

Advantages include:

Larger sticker artwork that is easier to drag.
Clear presentation of statistics and descriptions.
Opportunity to communicate rarity and flavour.
Reduced accidental component application.
Consistent interaction pattern with the existing Card Editor.

The Component Preview therefore acts as both an inspection panel and the source of the draggable sticker.

10. Benefits
Cleaner Separation of Responsibilities
UI Element	Responsibility
Inventory	Store and select cards
Component Inventory	Store and select components
Component Preview	Display component details and provide draggable sticker
Card Editor	Display and edit the currently selected card

Each interface now has a single, well-defined purpose.

Improved Maintainability

Editing logic becomes centralized inside the Card Editor instead of being distributed across every inventory card.

This reduces:

signal complexity
duplicated code
drag-and-drop handling
UI synchronization problems
Better User Experience

The workflow becomes much more intuitive.

Instead of:

Find component

↓

Drag tiny icon

↓

Hope correct card accepts drop

the player performs:

Select component

↓

Read description

↓

Drag large sticker

↓

Place on card

The interaction feels deliberate and mirrors the experience of decorating a collectible card.

Greater Extensibility

This architecture provides a strong foundation for future features, including:

Repositioning stickers after placement.
Sticker rotation and scaling.
Component removal by dragging off the card.
Cosmetic-only stickers and decals.
Layer ordering.
Sticker snapping and alignment guides.
Maximum sticker limits.
Animated and rare sticker effects.

Because editing is centralized, these features can be implemented without modifying the inventory or loadout systems.

11. Implementation Impact
System	Required Changes
Main.gd	Moderate – add Component Preview logic, Card Editor drop handling, and editor synchronization.
Player.gd	Small – store component offsets and apply components with positional data.
BulletTypes.gd	Small – expose sticker artwork and component metadata.
Component Preview	New functionality – display component details and provide draggable sticker.
Card Editor	Extended – accept sticker drops and render positioned stickers.
Inventory UI	Minor – components become selectable rather than directly draggable onto cards.
Loadout UI	No structural changes – continues to select cards for editing.
Conclusion

The proposed redesign replaces a distributed drag-and-drop system with a centralized editing workflow built around two dedicated interfaces: a Component Preview for inspecting and dragging upgrades, and a Card Editor for applying them.

By separating selection from editing, the interface becomes more intuitive, the implementation becomes significantly easier to maintain, and the system gains a robust foundation for future enhancements such as movable stickers, cosmetic customization, and richer card editing mechanics. This approach aligns the interaction model with the game's collectible-card aesthetic while minimizing unnecessary complexity in the underlying codebase.